---
layout: post
title: "Gordis c2: The Dynamics of Disease Transmission"
categories: 
- gordis
- epi 
---

**Disease Transmission**
There are two broad modes of disease transmission: direct (person-to-person contact) and indirect. Indirect transmission can occur via a common vehicle, which is a pathogenic source, or a vector. Vectors are interesting because they connect hosts, pathogenic agents, and the environment together. For instance, a vector can potentially spread a pathogen more effectively than the pathogen would otherwise. In the case of a common vehicle, such as contaminated food, disease can occur after discrete (single- or multiple) or continuous exposure to the vehicle. 

**Iceerg Model of Disease Progression**
Imagine Freud's ego/superego diagram depicting how a person's personality consists of conscious (ego) and subconscious (id, superego) elements. Pathogenesis is similar, because the onset and early stages of disease can develop without visible/perceptible signs or symptoms. Thus, disease can be distinguished by subclinical and clinical disease. I really enjoy how Gordis includes a parallel view of the cellular and organismal view of this idea. For instance, infection can begin by multiplication of the pathogen within the host, but eventually can impair cellular functions. At the organismal level, the former may not elicit any symptoms, but as cellular behaviour becomes distorted, severity of illness would increase.     

In terms of non-clinical disease (disease without symptoms), there are additional categories:
1. Preclinical: not yet apparent, but will become clinical 
2. Subclinical: not yet apparent, and will not become clinical 
3. Persistent (chronic): no apparent symptoms, suggesting recovery, but underlying infection remains. Occasionally, symptoms may resurface. 
4. Latent: typical of lysogenic viruses; pathogen is present, but does not multiply. 

**Scales of Disease**
The main disease phenomena are:
1. Endemics: geographically confined disease and/or the 'background rate' of disease 
2. Epidemic: larger geographic area than an endemic, similar illness(es) with a common/propagated source 
3. Pandemic: worldwide epidemic

The key here is to define what the expected 'baseline' rate is. Although one alternative is to perform constant surveillance, it's also typical to recognize an outbreak by a clear, undeniable difference in disease rate. 

**Herd Immunity**
We hear about this concept a lot nowadays - that it isn't necessary to immunize the entire population, but a sufficient proportion of it, in order to prevent the spread of a disease. However, herd immunity requires several conditions to establish:
1. The disease-causing agent should be restricted to a single host species in which disease occurs, and transmission should be relatively direct between hosts. Otherwise, we'd need to immunize the other species that serve as hosts as well. 
2. Infections must induce full immunity. if not, a sufficient population of immune indiivduals won't be achieved. 
3. Finally, herd immunity only happens if 'random mixing' of the population is assumed, which requires that each individual in the population encounters every other individual with equal chance. Then, by immunizing enough of the population, the chance for an encounter between susceptible individuals becomes much lower. The degree to which herd immunity works is related to the degree to which a group approaches random mixing. 

**Epidemic curve**
The epidemic curve is an intuitive description of an epidemic: number of cases vs. time. However, most epidemics have a rapid peak in cases early on, followed by a slower decay once effectivepublic health measures are established. These graphs usually look like left-skewed normal distributions. To turn them into Gaussians, you can plot against log-time. if you use log-log scale, you'd instead see a straight line, which can help with estimating the lenght of the median incubation period for the disease. 

**Attack rate**
An important term in epidemiology, but the *attack rate* is not a true rate, but rather, a proportion. As most things in epidemiology go, the definition is somewhat convoluted: 
- Attack rate = (number of exposed individuals who became ill) / (number of people exposed to a disease agent)

Therefore, the attack rate is essentially the proportion of people who developed disease after exposure to a disease agent. The chapter ends off with introducing a technique known as *cross tabulation*, which is essentially identical to pivot tables in Microsoft Excel, and simply involves plotting different parts of a dataset against each other to reveal relationships in the data. 