---
layout: post
title: "Gordis c1"
categories: 
- gordis
- epi 
---

In this series, I hope to write brief comments on each chapter of David Gordis’ now-standard text on epidemiology.

The first chapter introduces the main concepts of epidemiology, which is concerned with, broadly, how to track and prevent disease. Prevention involves three strategies: primary (to avoid disease onset), secondary (to identify existing disease early in pathogenesis), and tertiary (to reduce impact of disease). The hallmark of epidemiology, personally, is that it integrates both the hard science (medical, social, economic, etc.) and public policy.

Scientists working in health-related fields are required to connect their research to areas of significance, especially human health. However, epidemiology is a field that defies what has essentially become instinct for me – that our brand of laboratory science is not necessarily needed to significantly impede the spread and impact of a disease. Some great examples of this are Semmelweis (connect childbed fever, which often killed mothers during childbirth, with lack of hand hygiene of clinicians moving between obstetrics and autopsies), Jenner (who used cowpox to vaccinate a child and demonstrate that doing so protected against smallpox), and Snow (who identified that the London cholera epidemic was caused by polluted water supply). Each case implemented successful policy informed by observation rather than laboratory science. Truly eye-opening.

However, this is not to disparage the benefit of modern science. Unlike ever before, we can now develop, engage, and implement extensive infrastructure to combat unprecedented public health challenges (e.g. the ongoing COVID19 pandemic). But the dichotomy alluded above is also gradually disappearing for medicine as well: rather than viewing prevention and treatment as separate aims, the text argues that they are, and should, be pursued simultaneously. Indeed, preventing disease has a similar, if not greater, effect in reducing disease burden as does treating the disease once it develops.